# Java Fundamentals

Java is a high-level programming language that adopts a "write once, run anywhere" philosophy. A Java program can run anywhere that a Java Virtual Machine is present. An easily recognizable example of this benefit is the Android operating system: Java is often the language of choice for Android applications!

## Table of Contents
	1. Setup
	2. Our First (and Second!) Application
	3. Glossary


## Setup
Before we can start developing using Java, we need to be away of some structure that will enable us to **develop**, **compile**, and **run** our programs. More specifically, we will be taking a look at the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), the Java Runtime Environment (JRE or Java RTE), and the Java Development Kit (JDK).

Starting with the most specific, a Java Virtual Machine is an abstract computer defined by some specification. It exists to run Java programs that have been compiled into bytecode. The JVM exists to standardize execution of Java bytecode. Whether you use Windows, MacOS, Linux, or some other operating system, the JVM will always ensure that the compiles bytecode runs the same way. This is ultimately what allows Java to follow the mantra "write once, run anywhere."

The most common way of ensuring that a JVM is available on a personal computer is the installation of the Java Runtime Environment. The JRE is freely distributed by Oracle, and contains HotSpot (a standalone JVM), the Java standard library, and a configuration tool. 

As developers, we will install the Java Development Kit (JDK). The JDK is exactly what it sounds like: a set of tools that the Java developer can use in order to create programs. Some specific tools that we will make use of extremely shortly are as follows:

	- A complete JRE, including a JVM
	- javac (command): The Java Compiler, used to convert source code in to bytecode
		- Usage: javac Main.java
	- java (command): A loader for Java applications
		- Usage: java Main
	

The JDK can be downloaded here: https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase-jdk16-downloads.html

Downloading the installer will ensure that the JDK is placed in a standard location.

```
mac: /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk...
windows: C:\Program Files\Java\jdk...
```

## Our First (and Second!) Application

Now that we have a JDK installed on our personal machines, we can create our first Java Application. As is tradition, we will begin with a Hello World!

***Note: Need to make file path clear***

First, we create a file called Main.java, and place the following code inside:
```
public class Main {
	public static void main(String... args){
		System.out.println("Hello World!");
	}
}
```
This will act as our **source code**. The goal of this code is simply to print "Hello World!" to the log. We will discuss the specifics of the code later. 

With our source code written, we can open a terminal or command prompt to the directory that houses the Main.java file. When we are in the correct working directory, we can run the following command:
```
javac Main.java
```
This will compile our source code into **bytecode**. If this command runs successfully, it should return no information, and simply open a new line for a new prompt. If you take a moment to look at the files in the working directory, you should see that Main.java is now accompanied by Main.class

Now that we have the compiled bytecode ready, we should be able to run the following command:
```
java Main
```
and see our output!

Now that we've seen how a java file is compiled and run, we can manipulate the source code a small amount in order to allow the program to handle input.

Change the source code to 
```
public class Main {
	public static void main(String... args){
		System.out.println("Hello " + args[0] + "!");
	}
}
```
Then recompile the code, and run it with the following command:

```
java Main ###
```
where ### is your name. You should see the response "Hello ###!"

## Glossary

 - **bytecode**: Computer-readable code generated by the Java compiler from a program's source code. Executed by the Java Virtual Machine
 - **compile**: The act of converting human-readable source code to computer-readable byte code.
 - **develop**: The act of writing source code.
 - **run**: The act of executing bytecode with the help of the Java Virtual Machine
 - **source code**: High-level, human-readable Java code which is used to develop a program.
